README.md, before:

php-pygments
============

This project provides a PHP extension that wraps a subset of the pygments Python
library, streamlining it for use in PHP userspace. It uses libpython to load an
interpreter alongside the PHP process.

This codebase currently supports PHP 5 but won't be too difficult to port to PHP 7.

Primary author:

    Roger Gee <rpg11a@acu.edu>

Design
------

This extension works by embedding a Python interpreter inside PHP. This is
accomplished using `libpython`. Currently we target `libpython2.7`, however
upgrading to Python3 shouldn't be too hard. Currently only the
`pygments.highlight` and `HtmlFormatter` class functionalities are wrapped since
this was designed for dynamically generating syntax-highlighted code snippets as
HTML.

The extension loads the required pygments modules at module initialization
time. The extension maintains a global pygments context that is reused for each
library call. This avoids having to load the pygments code for each
request. Note, this only really provides any benefit if PHP is long-lived
(meaning it doesn't call `MINIT` for each request but once for some sequence of
requests). If ZTS is enabled, the module opens multiple contexts.

The global context maintains the state of several formatting options that can be
configured from PHP userspace. The options are reset at the end of each request
so that each request starts in the same state.

The Pygments library must be in the python load path. This is installed
externally and not configured by this extension.

Public API
----------

`void pygments_set_options(array $options)`

Sets formatter options on the global pygments context. The effects of this
function are preserved until the next call to this function.

* `$options`: An array of HtmlFormatter options to set on the
  formatter. Currently only the following keys are supported, and they align
  with the HtmlFormatter option names from Pygments:

    - (bool) `linenos`
    - (int) `linenostart`
    - (string) `lineanchors`
    - (bool) `noclasses`
    - (string) `classprefix`
    - (string) `cssclass`     [default=`php-pygments`]
    - (string) `cssstyles`
    - (string) `prestyles`

***

`string pygments_highlight(string $code[,string $lexer,string $filename])`

Uses the global pygments context to highlight the specified code. Pygments will
try to guess which lexer to use based on the contents of the source code unless
you specify a lexer or, alternatively, a filename.

* `$code`: the source code to highlight

_(Note: only specify at most one of the following parameters. They are meant to
be used exclusively if at all.)_

* `$lexer`: an optional lexer to force; do not `$filename` if you use this
  parameter

* `$filename`: the filename associated with the source code; Pygments will guess
  the lexer based on this filename; pass `null` for `$lexer` if you use this
  parameter; if Pygments doesn't find a lexer via filename, then the extension
  will attempt to have it guess via the source code content

Considerations
--------------

I have not tested the ZTS code yet. I'm not sure about libpython's thread safety
either.

Use the [python valgrind suppression file](https://svn.python.org/projects/python/trunk/Misc/valgrind-python.supp) when testing for errors/memory leaks with valgrind.

Commit message:

Bump version and update README

README.md, after:

php-pygments
============

> Version `1.0.1`

This project provides a PHP extension that wraps a subset of the pygments Python
library, streamlining it for use in PHP userspace. It uses libpython to load an
interpreter alongside the PHP process.

This codebase currently supports PHP 5; however it won't be too difficult to
port to PHP 7.

Primary author:

    Roger Gee <rpg11a@acu.edu>

Design
------

This extension works by embedding a Python interpreter inside PHP. This is
accomplished using `libpython`. Currently we target `libpython2.7`; however
using Python3 should also work. Currently only the `pygments.highlight` and
`HtmlFormatter` class functionalities are wrapped since this was designed for
dynamically generating syntax-highlighted code snippets as HTML.

The extension loads the required pygments modules at module initialization
time. The extension maintains a global pygments context that is reused for each
library call. This avoids having to load the pygments code for each
request. Note, this only really provides any benefit if PHP is long-lived
(meaning it doesn't call `MINIT` for each request but once for some sequence of
requests). If ZTS is enabled, the module opens multiple contexts per thread.

The global context maintains the state of several formatting options that can be
configured from PHP userspace. The options are reset at the end of each request
so that each request starts in the same state.

The Pygments library must be in the python load path. This is installed
externally and not configured by this extension.

Public API
----------

`void pygments_set_options(array $options)`

Sets formatter options on the global pygments context. The effects of this
function are preserved until the next call to this function.

* `$options`: An array of HtmlFormatter options to set on the
  formatter. Currently only the following keys are supported, and they align
  with the HtmlFormatter option names from Pygments:

    - (bool) `linenos`
    - (int) `linenostart`
    - (string) `lineanchors`
    - (bool) `noclasses`
    - (string) `classprefix`
    - (string) `cssclass`     [default=`php-pygments`]
    - (string) `cssstyles`
    - (string) `prestyles`

***

`string pygments_highlight(string $code[,string $lexer,string $filename])`

Uses the global pygments context to highlight the specified code. Pygments will
try to guess which lexer to use based on the contents of the source code unless
you specify a lexer or, alternatively, a filename.

* `$code`: the source code to highlight

_(Note: only specify at most one of the following parameters. They are meant to
be used exclusively if at all.)_

* `$lexer`: an optional lexer to force; do not use `$filename` if you use this
  parameter

* `$filename`: the filename associated with the source code; Pygments will guess
  the lexer based on this filename; pass `null` for `$lexer` if you use this
  parameter; if Pygments doesn't find a lexer via filename, then the extension
  will attempt to have it guess via the source code content

Considerations
--------------

I have not tested the ZTS code yet. I'm not sure about libpython's thread safety
either. Also, it may run inefficiently since PHP may create a context per thread
instead of sharing a pool of context's between threads. More work needs to be
done with ZTS to understand this.

Use the [python valgrind suppression file](https://svn.python.org/projects/python/trunk/Misc/valgrind-python.supp) when testing for errors/memory leaks with valgrind.
